MCAI COMPANION MANUAL
=====================

MCAI runs a local Paper server and a physical Mineflayer companion. The
default bot name is "tj", but both the bot name and owner are private
configuration. A local LLM is optional and is used mainly for dialogue;
movement, collection, crafting, and safety remain code-first.

PRODUCT SCOPE
-------------

The supported public-alpha focus is a dependable surface companion:

- come, follow, stay, and emergency stop
- owner-only action commands
- food and inventory awareness
- wood, stone, coal, and surface-iron collection
- basic tool crafting
- charcoal and iron smelting
- short companion dialogue and narration
- local telemetry and safe controls

Villagers, Nether work, blueprints, broad progression, large builds, and
experimental combat are not part of the default product promise. Their source
or status helpers may exist behind disabled feature flags. Curriculum and
progression operating systems were removed from the live companion tree.

REQUIREMENTS
------------

- Windows for the supported all-in-one launcher
- Node.js 20 or newer
- Java 21 or newer
- Paper matching the Minecraft version in config.json
- Minecraft Java Edition
- optional local Ollama or OpenAI-compatible model server

Keep Minecraft, dashboard, and the optional bridge on loopback. Do not
port-forward the project.

FIRST SETUP
-----------

From the repository root:

1. Install bot dependencies:

   Set-Location .\bot
   npm install
   Set-Location ..

2. Install Paper and, if needed, Java:

   .\scripts\Install-Paper.ps1
   .\scripts\Install-Java.ps1

3. Run MCAI.cmd without flags. First-run setup creates config.json, generates
   private dashboard and bridge tokens, and asks for the owner and bot names.

4. Keep host and dashboardHost on 127.0.0.1. Never commit config.json.

Advanced manual installs may copy config.example.json, but must replace both
token placeholders. Review the Minecraft EULA at
https://aka.ms/MinecraftEULA before starting the server. MCAI asks for explicit
acceptance before writing eula=true. A non-interactive first server start may
use --accept-eula only after the agreement has been reviewed.

START AND STOP
--------------

Interactive launcher:

   MCAI.cmd

Common command-line forms:

   MCAI.cmd --start-server
   MCAI.cmd --start-server --accept-eula
   MCAI.cmd --start-bot
   MCAI.cmd --start
   MCAI.cmd --status
   MCAI.cmd --stop-bot
   MCAI.cmd --stop-server
   MCAI.cmd --stop

The normal daily path is MCAI.cmd --start. Join the local address printed by
the launcher with the Minecraft version configured in config.json.

FIRST IN-GAME CHECK
-------------------

Send these from the configured owner account:

   tj help
   tj status
   tj come here
   tj follow me
   tj stay
   tj inventory
   tj get wood
   tj what danger is nearby
   tj fish
   tj stop

The configured owner is the only account allowed to trigger actions or approve
risky work. Other players may receive harmless dialogue when enabled, but they
must not be able to move the bot, teach command mappings, or confirm actions.

Use "tj stop" whenever behavior is unexpected. It should cancel current
movement and active tasks promptly.

"tj what danger is nearby" reports named hostile mobs and environmental
hazards that TJ can currently detect. "tj fish" keeps casting beside safe,
open water until the owner sends "tj stop". At low health TJ reports his
current hearts, backs away from danger, eats available safe food, and asks the
owner for food or help when he cannot recover on his own.

LOCAL LLM
---------

The launcher and dashboard Setup page can select Ollama, LM Studio, or another
local OpenAI-compatible server and assign installed models by role. Commands do
not require an LLM when the configured mode keeps routing code-first.

If dialogue is not needed, use the supported off mode in config.json. Never
point the project at an untrusted public model endpoint with private context.

DASHBOARD
---------

Default address:

   http://127.0.0.1:8787

Use the private dashboardToken from config.json when prompted. The dashboard
shows bot/owner state, safety, current work, inventory, recent evidence, and
logs. Advanced panels may show unavailable or parked when their feature is off.

The dashboard does not provide arbitrary JavaScript, shell execution, raw
Mineflayer calls, or an unrestricted command console. Do not expose port 8787
to the internet.

DEVELOPER CHECKS
----------------

From the repository root:

   Set-Location .\bot
   npm run check
   npm test
   npm run doctor

Focused checks include:

   npm run test:thin-core
   npm run test:competent-core
   npm run test:skills
   npm run test:evidence
   npm run dashboard:test

Historical phase audits may remain for regression coverage, but they are not
current product setup instructions.

PRIVATE DATA
------------

Do not commit or distribute:

- config.json or .env files
- dashboard/bridge tokens
- memory and session files
- worlds, player data, ops, whitelist, or bans
- Paper jars or downloaded Java runtimes
- logs, crash files, or node_modules

Back up the world and memory files before upgrades or destructive testing.

TROUBLESHOOTING
---------------

Launcher exits before starting:
   Confirm Node.js is installed and config.json is valid JSON.

Paper does not start:
   Confirm Java and a matching paper-<version>-*.jar are present. Review the
   server window and logs for the actual error.

Bot does not join:
   Confirm Paper is listening, the configured version matches, the bot name is
   allowed, and required Mineflayer dependencies are installed.

Dashboard returns 401:
   Enter the private dashboardToken from config.json.

LLM is unavailable:
   Start the configured local model server or keep LLM mode off/dialogue-only.
   Core companion commands should remain deterministic.

Task appears stuck:
   Send "tj stop", check launcher status, then preserve recent logs and the
   session log before restarting so the failure can be diagnosed.

CURRENT REFERENCES
------------------

- README.md: product overview
- QUICKSTART_1_0.md: first-run steps
- launcher/README.md: launcher commands and menu
- ARCHITECTURE.md: runtime tiers and feature gates
- MODULE_MAP.md: source map
- docs/guides/DASHBOARD.md: dashboard and setup
- docs/guides/SKILLS.md: skill and evidence model
- TEST_COMMANDS.txt: in-game smoke list

Files under docs/history and archive are point-in-time records, not current
installation or product guidance.
